---
title: "Associations Between Physical Activity and Brain Networks: Preliminary Findings from the PRANK Study"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2012-03-01-talk-1
venue: "University of Nebraska Medical Center: Neuroscience Graduate Student Symposium"
date: 2023-08-01
location: "Omaha, NE"
---

Abstract: Periadolescence is a neurodevelopmental period characterized by expansive development of the brain’s underlying functional networks. The frontoparietal (FPN), default mode (DMN), and dorsal attention (DAN) networks exhibit changes in functional connectivity associated with maturation of cognitive abilities. Understanding factors that may modify and strengthen these networks during development is an emerging field of scientific investigation. For example, recent evidence suggests that amount of physical activity and exercise may influence functional connectivity and cognition. Studies in populations of young and older adults that have participated in an exercise intervention found increased within-network connectivity and superior cognitive performance compared to control groups. However, the association between physical activity and brain network characteristics in periadolescence has yet to be fully elucidated. Specifically, the relationship between physical activity and developing brain networks, measured through resting state functional connectivity (rs-FC) analysis, is not well-understood in the periadolescent epoch. Understanding these developmental trajectories, and targeted interventions to rescue them in cases of dysfunction, could potentially help to promote brain health and reduce the risk of neurological disease, including late-life disorders such as AD.

The results from this talk are now published, and can be viewed on my <a href="#publications">Publications</a> page!


